---
layout: post
title: "Prelude: your body is a f___ing miracle"
date: 2023-05-03
published: true
tags: 
---
This is easy to forget when something about it is not functioning as it should, but that thing you're running on is absolutely *wild*. 

To get you to read this, your pupils dilate or shrink in response to the light conditions, and thousands of muscle fibers move your eyes with remarkable precision to follow the line of text.
Photoreceptors in the back of your retina then react to the incoming stream of photons by sending electrical signals toward the visual cortex in your brain. 
There, a complex cascade of tens of thousands of neurons processes signals before passing information on to other regions of the brain that "make sense" of what you see, in ways that we currently do not nearly understand. 
At the same time, your body maintains precise levels of oxygen and carbon dioxide in millions of cells throughout your body by adjusting your breathing pattern.
It also keeps your core body temperature constant so cells don't die, and keeps nerve cells throughout your body at a precise voltage difference between cell inside and outside, such that they can "fire" whenever needed. 
It manages an incredibly complex food processing system in your stomach and, by and large, tells you what it needs (food, water, sleep) at which times. 
Not being satisfied with these amazing feats, it does all of this robustly in the face of harsh environmental conditions, keeps functioning even when individual components fail, and runs for decades on whatever crap you feed it – it literally turns junk food into *you* – without ever shutting down for maintenance or installing updates. 
Engineers cannot even reproduce a tiny fraction of what *your body* does, every day, without you noticing it.

Your body – just like every other aspect of nature – is an absolute marvel.
It can make one question whether there must be some kind of divine being for such incredible perfection to arise.
Maybe treat this wondrous thing gently, and with compassion? It's the only one you have, for life.
