---
layout: post
title: "Optimizing hormone health, Pt. 3: Diet"
date: 2023-05-31
published: True
tags: 
---
How does diet, of all things affect hormone health? In many different ways, as it turns out.
- Maybe most obviously, diet affects blood sugar / insulin levels, which then in turn affects other hormone levels. (Rule of thumb: sugary food makes blood sugar spike. Spiking blood sugar is bad.)
- All hormone-producing organs (thyroid, ovaries/testes, pancreas, etc.) need specific nutrients to operate properly, which must be provided by a healthy and diverse diet.
- On the other hand, diet can also actively harm these organs, for example by causing *inflammation*.
- More generally, the gut and the gut microbiome - the collection of trillions of microbes inhabiting your intestines - have recently been identified as an absolute key player in essentially all health issues. The gut microbiome has even been named an "endocrine organ" (=hormone-producing organ), and terms such as "the estrogen-gut microbiome axis" and the "gut-brain axis" are widely accepted in the scientific literature.
- Purely empirically, it has simply been observed that diet and nutrition play an absolute key role in all kinds of hormone-related diseases, including MDD and fertility-related issues.

While dietary science is incredibly complex and often contradictory, the key elements can be summarized simply and plainly:
**Get as much as possible of the good stuff that keeps your body running, and avoid the bad stuff that actively harms it as much as possible.**

Concerning the good stuff, these are the things that you should ideally get *every day*:
- At least five pieces of fresh (!) vegetables or fruits (frozen is ok). Try to get as much variety as possible, i.e., not the exact same kinds of fruits/veggies every day. They all have different nutrient profiles, and by eating a very diverse diet you increase the chance that your body gets all the nutrients it needs. (Just as a point of reference: [the world health organization recommends](https://www.who.int/news-room/fact-sheets/detail/healthy-diet) "**at least** 400 g (i.e. five portions) of fruit and vegetables per day (2), excluding potatoes, sweet potatoes, cassava and other starchy roots.")
- A large serving of "leafy greens": salad, spinach, fresh herbs, kale, etc. These are true nutrient powerhouses! Again, try to get as much variety as possible.
- Sufficient protein. The recommended **minimum** daily amount is 1g of protein per kilogram bodyweight per day. Healthy sources of protein include fish, dairy products, (unprocessed) meat, eggs, lentils and beans, nuts and seeds, and grain/flour products. While you absolutely do not have to count grams of protein every day, it is a very useful (and important) exercise to take the time to figure out whether you're getting enough protein *on an average day* (and not once a week). Look at the protein content of the food you're eating (you can find [the protein content of many foods online](https://www.health.harvard.edu/blog/how-much-protein-do-you-need-every-day-201506188096), otherwise have a look at the label) and add up whether you end up in a reasonable range on a normal day.

For the bad stuff, these are the things you will want to avoid as much as possible:
- Highly processed foods. This includes basically everything you buy in a supermarket that you would not be able to easily reproduce yourself at home. Most notably, all kinds of sweets and (sadly) most vegetarian meat replacements fall into this category. There are several problems with highly processed foods, one of them being that they usually contain large amounts of preservatives, emulsifiers, and various other synthetic additives, many of which are believed to be unhealthy.
- Refined sugar and anything that contains it in large amounts. I highly recommend [this excellent read on sugar, its dangers, and the dangers of studying and writing about its dangers](https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/apr/07/the-sugar-conspiracy-robert-lustig-john-yudkin). The most popular offender in this category are sweetened beverages. (Replacing sugar by eating loads of artificial sweeteners / "diet" products instead is a terrible idea, by the way - those are just bad in other ways.)
- Foods high in trans fats, which are now universally recognized to be very unhealthy. These most importantly include deep-fried foods (such as fries and donuts), margarine, frozen pizzas, and various (especially cheap/lower-quality) bakery products such as cakes, cookies, etc. (The latter *can* be made in a healthy way, it's just that especially the supermarket variety usually is not.)

### Some selected scientific studies

**Minireview: Gut microbiota: the neglected endocrine organ**. Clarke et al., Molecular Endocrinology, 2014. [Link](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/24892638/).  

**Estrogen-gut microbiome axis: Physiological and clinical implications**. Baker et al., Maturitas, 2017. [Link](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/28778332/).  
"One of the principal regulators of circulating estrogens is the gut microbiome."

**Female Fertility and the Nutritional Approach: The Most Essential Aspects**. Skoracka et al., Advances in Nutrition, 2021. [Link](https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S2161831322005129).  
"A growing body of evidence points to a link between diet and female fertility. In fact, data show that a diet high in trans fats, refined carbohydrates, and added sugars can negatively affect fertility. Conversely, a diet based on the Mediterranean dietary patterns, i.e., rich in dietary fiber, omega-3 (ɷ-3) fatty acids, plant-based protein, and vitamins and minerals, has a positive impact on female fertility."

**The gut-brain axis: interactions between enteric microbiota, central and enteric nervous systems**. Carabotti et al., Annals of Gastroenterology, 2015. [Link](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/25830558/).  
"The gut-brain axis (GBA) consists of bidirectional communication between the central and the enteric nervous system, linking emotional and cognitive centers of the brain with peripheral intestinal functions. Recent advances in research have described the importance of gut microbiota in influencing these interactions. This interaction between microbiota and GBA appears to be bidirectional, namely through signaling from gut-microbiota to brain and from brain to gut-microbiota by means of neural, endocrine, immune, and humoral links."

**Ultra-Processed Foods and Health Outcomes: A Narrative Review**. Elizabetz et al., Nutrients, 2020. [Link](https://www.mdpi.com/2072-6643/12/7/1955).  
"The nutrition literature and authoritative reports increasingly recognise the concept of ultra-processed foods (UPF), as a descriptor of unhealthy diets. UPFs are now prevalent in diets worldwide. ... Of 43 studies reviewed, 37 found dietary UPF exposure associated with at least one adverse health outcome. Among adults, these included overweight, obesity and cardio-metabolic risks; cancer, type-2 diabetes and cardiovascular diseases; irritable bowel syndrome, depression and frailty conditions; and all-cause mortality."

**A review of lifestyle factors that contribute to important pathways associated with major depression: Diet, sleep and exercise**. Lopresti et al., Journal of Affective Disorders, 2013. [Link](https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/abs/pii/S0165032713000694).  
"Research on major depression has confirmed that it is caused by an array of biopsychosocial and lifestyle factors. Diet, exercise and sleep are three such influences that play a significant mediating role in the development, progression and treatment of this condition."

**Biological Role of Nutrients, Food and Dietary Patterns in the Prevention and Clinical Management of Major Depressive Disorder**. Ortega et al., Nutrients, 2022. [Link](https://www.mdpi.com/2072-6643/14/15/3099).  
"It seems that there is a bidirectional relationship between MDD and malnutrition, and depressed individuals often lack certain critical nutrients along with an aberrant dietary pattern. Thus, dietary interventions are one of the most promising tools to explore in the field of MDD, as there are a specific group of nutrients (i.e., omega 3, vitamins, polyphenols, and caffeine), foods (fish, nuts, seeds fruits, vegetables, coffee/tea, and fermented products) or dietary supplements (such as S-adenosylmethionine, acetyl carnitine, creatine, amino acids, etc.), which are being currently studied."
