---
layout: post
title: "Optimizing hormone health, Pt. 2: Sleep"
date: 2023-05-26
published: True
tags: 
---
For overall hormone health, it is immensely important to have a consistent and healthy daily wake / sleep cycle.
This cycle is mostly dominated by how **cortisol** and **melatonin** levels change over the course of the day.
These will affect how energetic you feel throughout the day, and how restful your nightly sleep will be.
They also strongly influence all other hormone levels and cycles.

In the ideal case, cortisol (the "stress hormone", but also just the "I’m awake! hormone") would be high early in the morning to get you out of bed and up and running for the day.
Cortisol levels should then decline over the day until they are very low late in the evening. 
At the same time, melatonin (the "sleep hormone") levels should be rising continuously and be very high in the evening. 
Low cortisol + high melatonin will then make you nice and sleepy and ready for good and restorative sleep.

This is a recurring daily *cycle*: 
While we can (and do) influence the levels of both hormones in various ways throughout the day - both positively and negatively, more on that below - the body also has some kind of a pre-set “cycle program” that it’s expecting to run. 
This will adapt to your habits over time, but that takes a while.
This is, for example, why we suffer from jetlag: your body needs time to adjust the daily hormone cycles to the new daily rhythm.  
This is also why it’s very important (and strongly emphasized by experts on sleep medicine) to have a highly consistent daily sleep rhythm, i.e., to roughly go to bed and wake up at the same time every day, to the degree compatible with your life.

Very importantly, both cortisol and melatonin levels are *strongly* affected by **light exposure**. 
This makes a lot of sense when you think about it: daylight is a simple mechanism by which the body can "synchronize" its daily rhythms to the environment. 
It also explains why bright light, especially blue-ish light, leads to big cortisol releases: that’s basically early daylight, telling your body that now would be a great time to wake up! 
Exposure to bright light is thus a great tool to tell your body in the morning to please wake up. 
(Notice that *outside* daylight, even on a cloudy day, is orders of magnitude brighter than any lamp inside or even a window.) 
It *also* means that exposing your body to bright or blue light late in the day is a bad idea: it leads to cortisol release, prevents melatonin buildup, and leads to poor sleep.
This is one of multiple reasons why looking at phones in bed is an awful idea, as opposed to, e.g., reading a book: smartphone screens emit lots of blue light. 
(There are [various studies](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.socscimed.2015.11.037) showing how phone usage in bed negatively affects sleep. 
Getting rid of the phone in bed is probably the first thing any sleep therapist will tell you.
At the very least, get a blue light blocker for phone + laptop.) 

**Caffeine** obviously also affects wakefulness and sleep. 
Indeed, its main action is to prevent melatonin buildup. 
Even though caffeine’s effect peaks within less than one hour of consumption, it remains active for many more hours. 
Not surprisingly, caffeine consumption late during the day has been shown to negatively affect sleep quality in various studies.
The general recommendations are thus to not consume caffeine less than 8 hours before sleep.

Maybe slightly less obviously, cortisol/melatonin and wake/sleep cycles are also strongly affected by **psychological stress**, such as due to depression (technical term: major depressive disorder, MDD). 
Any kind of psychological stress leads to cortisol release, thus potentially disturbing wake/sleep rhythms. 
In fact, one of the key markers of MDD is an increased cortisol level late in the evening, and MDD is  - little surprisingly, now that we understand all of this - also known to be associated with poor sleep quality, insomnia, etc.
(The hormonal mechanism discussed here is of course not the only mechanism - rumination and related issues play an important and separate role.)

While complex health issues like MDD are certainly far from easy to fix, the relationship between psychological stress and sleep generally implies that it is a bad idea to deal with stressful things late during the evening, be it work-related things, complex interpersonal issues, annoying administrative stuff, or anything of the like.


### Some selected scientific studies
**Sleep, Circadian Rhythms, and Fertility**. Goldstein and Smith, Current SLeep Medicine Reports, 2016. [Link](https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s40675-016-0057-9).  
"... disruption of the circadian timing system by exposure to abnormal light-dark cycles or mutations of core clock genes results in diminished reproductive capacity in animals. Abnormalities in menstruation, fertility, and early pregnancy maintenance in female shift workers provide evidence for a role of circadian rhythms in the reproductive health of women. Reproductive hormones may modify sleep, and the relationship is bidirectional such that sleep disruption may alter the profile of reproductive hormone secretion. Therefore, sleep, apart from its circadian timing, may also have relevance in attaining pregnancy. Additionally, infertility is associated with psychological distress which may result in poor quality sleep."

**Sleep Disturbances in Depression**. Murphy and Peterson, Sleep Medicine Clinics, 2014. [Link](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5678925/).  
"One of the most consistent symptoms associated with major depressive disorder is sleep disturbance. These problems with sleep regulation are not secondary to the illness; rather, they often precede the depressive episodes and can persist during remission. Improving sleep in depressed patients is found to improve outcomes."

**Melatonin and the circadian system: contributions to successful female reproduction**. Reiter et al., Fertility and Sterility, 2ß16. [Link](https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0015028214005470).  
"Both stable circadian rhythms and cyclic melatonin availability are critical for optimal ovarian physiology and placental function. Because light exposure after darkness onset at night disrupts the master circadian clock and suppresses elevated nocturnal melatonin levels, light at night should be avoided."
